## Data visualization of reading scores for 4th graders in countries with English as first language, 2011

### by Aarthy Vallur towards fulfillment of P6

This Data visualization shows the average reading proficiency scores for 4th graders in 5 countries where English is taught as the first language along with the international average for 2011. The data was obtained from the NCES and is part of the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) data. The data was collected based on the students' response to a pre- determined questionnaire. 

## Design
### Preliminary exploration of data using Excel and R
I chose the data because I am interested in how reading contributes to educational achievement evaluation at many levels. The original data set consists of reading scores for over 60 countries with many categories. I chose to compare reading scores in the presence and absence of amenities and facilities outside school, such as room, desk, table and internet, since these are variables that were objectively accounted for. I also chose advanced countries that teach english as the first language, such as US, Canada, England, Australia and Singapore to be able to see how the availability of the above factors influences reading scores without interference from other factors such as language and economic differences on the students. I chose to include the international average as a means of comparison. 
I chose my parameters in [PIRLS] [1]
 [1]: http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/pirls/idepirls/ "PIRLS"                           and downloaded a series of data files. I then chose the conditions I wanted, namely, having or not having desk and table; having or not having either both or one of room and internet duration of study from 30 minutes->2 hours and assembled my datafile,```Data/Data3.csv```.  When I explored the initial dataset using R, I found that bivariate analysis allowed to visualize the average reading scores in the presence or absence of a particular factor, such as desk, table, room or internet. A series of facet wrapped bivariate graphs revealed subtle differences among the countries (in comment below). I then realized that overarching take-away from the visualization needs to be
1. Reading scores drop when students don t have access to facilities and amenities outside school , with the largest drop seen when they don’t have room and internet.
2. This is not a  country-specific phenomenon but a global trend, since it is reflected by the international average too. 
3. There is room for improvement even in developed countries regarding reading scores 
Towards that end, I realized I needed a visualization that will allow easy comparisons between trends and countries .  I then created a bar graph for the United states and overlaid other countries as lines. This created a good but confusing visual, since the y-axis scale was spread out clustering all the lines. Though this gave me a template to compare, it was not clear to visualize the message I wanted to compare. 
Also, looking at the data and the graphs, I realized that the duration of study was a personal factor that did not fit with the others, that were external, whose presence or absence can be objectively noted . So I removed it and wrangled the data to create ```Data/Data4.csv```  as the final datafile with the following factors for the countries chosen and the International average.
1. The chosen factors refer to amenities and facilities that can exist at home or in the community. What is considered in the study is whether the student has access on demand to these amenities and facilities outside school.
2. “Room” refers to the availability of a dedicated private space for the student to use out of school. 
3. “Internet” refers to the availability of internet access at home or another place, out of school.
4. "Room and internet" are also grouped in the study, since many times, they were identified as co-dependent. 
5.  "No room or internet" refers to the absence of access to both while "Room or internet" refers to access to either room or internet only. 
6. Desk and table refer to availability of furniture dedicated for the student's academic use at any time outside school. Desk and table imply the same but are included for 2 reasons. One, they were used interchangeably in some countries. Two, in other countries, desk means a typical student's desk while table means other surfaces in a home such as a kitchen table that a student may use. 
7. The grouping of the factors into "Desk and table" reflects the above terminology. I have modified the factor in the final visualization to "Desk or table" to underscore their similarity. "No desk or table" refers to the lack of access to dedicated furniture,  outside of school for academic purposes.

With this I created an initial line plot with a zoomed in y-axis for better discernment of trends using dimple.js in `index_1_clean.html`.  Taking the feedback from my initial submission into account, I tried to create a multi-category bar chart too. But, as with the initial visualizations, I found the bar charts busy, hard to interpret and more importantly, I thought they did not effectively convey my message, which was the general decline in reading scores in the absence of the chosen factors. The change in reading scores is subtle, though discernible. The bar charts did not have the ability to convey this trend as simply as the line charts. Though I understand that using line charts to represent categorical data is unorthodox, I will stick with it since, in this situation
1.  The line plots offer the means to visualize the trend of declining reading scores with the loss of access to each factor as represented in the x- axis
2. The decline follows a general trend in the chosen countries as well as the international average.

The line plots looked clean and easy to visualize. I then solicited feedback from 3 viewers:
### Feedback 1:
I really like the line plots, since they are simple and distinct due to the colors used. It is easy to see that all countries are above international average and that, the factors are clearly similar in these countries. The data is interesting and a clear trend of dropping reading scores when an amenity is not present, especially for internet is visible. But the zoomed scale irks me a bit-Are these differences even significant? I would like to see only lines I choose, so counties can be compared in any way the viewer chooses. This will make the data more visually informative.
### Feedback 2:
I like the dataset in that the colors and bubbles are distinct and there are not too many categories in the graph. I like the pointer and how it aligns all the points. But, the factors-Desk and table , room and internet are misleading to me-Does having desk or table mean the student also has a room? Or doe sit mean that a student with a room also has a desk? What is the overlap among these factors? Nevertheless, clearly, internet is a factor in reading scores-without which there is a very visible drop. This seems to be more drastic for some countries like Singapore and Australia than others. A bit of interactivity will make this a very satisfactory visualization.
### Feedback 3:
Simple and clear visualization, but the data seems more complex. Are these strictly home amenities? Do the students have access to desk or internet elsewhere like a library? That is not clear. But clearly in the absence of amenities, reading scores drop, more in some cases. Why does Australia see this drop? How is it different from the other countries? Also, were the sample sizes comparable to begin with? Singapore will have less students than the US or Canada, surely. The visualization does justice to the chosen data though. It is easy to understand the major trend. I would like to see bright colors or some way to pop-up the lines.

## Design incorporating feedback:
Taking these feedback into account, I incorporated the following into my updated visualization, `index_2_clean.html`. My first task was to focus my visualization away from confusing data themes.
1. Created ```Data/Data6.csv``` to focus on the effect of access to room and internet on student reading scores. The dataset has some short comings that need to be mentioned here. As raised in Feedback 2, it is possible that access to desk or table/room and internet are not mutually exclusive, in that a student with access to room and internet may also have access to desk and table, which could explain the similarity in reading scores between the "Access to room and internet" and "Access to desk or table" factors. This overlap is not clarified in the original questionnaire, which was designed to be answered by students themselves. Since it is a questionnaire for 9 year olds, the factors could have been pooled to offer simple options to students. To clarify the visualization and remove any ambiguity regarding the factors considered, I chose to remove "Access" and "No access to Desk or table" as factors in the final visualization. Room and internet seem to be the biggest influencers of reading scores based on the initial plot.
2. Interactive legends, which are click-enabled. Clicking filters that category out. This allows for viewer-driven comparisons of any of the categories and how they differ among the factors chosen
3. Incorporated more descriptive x- axis labels to improve viewer understanding of factors. 
4. Changed chart title to be more descriptive.
Interactive legends really drove home the message of how reading scores drop when access to room and internet are absent. Comparisons between 2 or more categories became much easier. To clarify, Feedback 3,  I chose the countries to convey reading scores in developed countries that teach English as the first language. But, it must be reiterated that the sample size is by no means the same in each country or does it address the differences in teaching styles in each country. Sample size may explain the sharp drops seen in city state like Singapore. There could be an over-reliance on the internet to offer reading material or testing rather than books in some countries. This could explain the sharp drops in reading scores in Singapore and Australia,  when the student does not have access to room and internet. 
The visualization conveyed that in developed countries, the internet is emerging as a major educational tool, which when lacking can lower reading scores for students.
